**McNally, Notes for Socialising Big Data article, January 2016**

Overview
========

How can we ‘do’ Social Intelligence and an Ethic of Care? Or to put it
another way – Where did the idea of Social Intelligence and Ethic of
Care come from? Answer to both questions: Collaboratories

Collaboratories
===============

**Collaboratories as a method for the Big Data Problem Space –
Isomorphism between Big Data and Collaboratories**

‘*Big Data involves a redistribution of data collection and research
methods expertise and the restructuring of infrastructures, which
necessitates engagement with a wider range of collaborators’* (SBD WP
pp. 28-29 Summary of Key Conclusions).

*‘When problematized, Big Data requires particular forms of
collaboration between different stakeholders and practitioners’* (SBD WP
pp. 28-29 Summary of Key Conclusions).

*‘In this regard, collaboration provides a useful way to understand the
problems of working with Big Data. Through this approach, for example,
we can identify who the important players are and ask questions about
this burgeoning topic. The Final Collaboratory has revealed some of the
key players in the field, but certain stakeholders were absent, such as,
the users and producers of Big Data*.’ (SBD WP pp. 28-29 Summary of Key
Conclusions).

**Collaboratories and the role of Provocations**

*‘Many genomic researchers are well-versed in the main ethical and
social issues associated with genomics. ….. This familiarity with
ethical and legal discussions can make it difficult to initiate other
topics of dialogue. …. We found it necessary to put discussions on a
different footing by working in visual terms (graphics, tables), making
use of genomics researchers own databases and software tools, and
generally trying to re-purpose genomic researchers own data literacy in
the conversation by showing them data gathered from databases about
their own data. This approach leads to mixed results. On the one hand,
it certainly overcomes some problems of distance and unfamiliarity. ….
On the other, this data is now presented with a view to challenging them
to think about their own metrics and their own ways of talking about the
value of sequence data. Some robust discussion usually arises’* (SBD WP
Genomics and Collaboratories pp. 25-26)

‘*That said, more provocation and controversy could have been
introduced’* (SBD WP Final Collab p. 29)

**Collaboratory as an agonistic space for the articulation of
differences and productive misunderstandings**

Evelyn makes the point that the (NSI) collaboratory was not organised to
share skills, develop methods or analyse Big Data (i.e. not for
instrumental purposes), but to pose critical questions. She asks:

-   *how can collaboratories be left open to ‘productive
    misunderstandings’? That is, rather than seeking consensus, how
    might we state the values or benefits of bringing together and
    allowing for the tensions and different perspectives and interests
    to be expressed and engaged?* (SBD WP pp. 24-25 National Statistics
    and Collaboratories).

This reminds me of Barry et al’s logics of interdisciplinarity. [^1] The
authors identify 3 logics that motivate interdisciplinary collaboration:
the logic of innovation (linked to the economy); the logic of
accountability (linked to democratisation); and the logic of ontology.
It is the latter that Evelyn seems to be appealing to in asking for how
collaboratories can be left open to ‘productive misunderstandings’. The
mode of interdisciplinarity that is associated with the logic of
ontology is that of agonism/antagonism which also seems to align with
the notion of ‘productive misunderstandings’. Thus the goal of a
collaboratory could be to create an agonistic space where different
kinds of stakeholders can enter into debate with each other rather than
speaking to themselves.

> *[Will Spooner] proposed that collaboratories are distinguished from
> other kinds of collaborative research because they examine how things
> in the world are constituted as objects (e.g. Big Data as a Digital
> Data Object (DDO). In this regard, collaboratories could be said to
> disrupt existing hierarchies and to challenge the status quo (Supp
> Appendices p. 11).*

**But is there a will to participate in such collaboratories – and who
would fund them? **

-   *in the face of economic and practical constraints such as time, the
    relevance and value of collaboratories that are more exploratory and
    conceptual rather than directly instrumental (e.g. developing
    specific applications/methods) need to be outlined rather than
    assumed* (SBD WP pp. 24-25 National Statistics and Collaboratories).

Social Intelligence
===================

Social Intelligence is awareness of the ways in which BD is constituted
through and deeply implicated in social relations in both its
composition and in its social effects.

**Against the fallacy of Data-Driven Anything **

Narratives about Big Data as the driver of socio-economic change –
whether for the better or the worse – tend to attribute Big Data with
intrinsic properties – the ability to act in a deterministic way – to
have impacts on individuals and collectivities with positive or negative
outcomes.

Social Intelligence problematizes the concept of data-driven anything –
data-driven economies, data-driven science, data-driven societies.

**Collaboratories as windows onto the Social Intelligence of Big Data**

By bringing together a diversity of stakeholders, collaboratories are
spaces in which it is possible to foreground the articulation of
counter-narratives instead of over-optimistic and over-pessimistic
narratives of Big Data that tend to be ballistic, deterministic and
unrealistic.

In terms of social intelligence, our genomics collaboratory tended to
focus on the social composition dynamics of Big Data rather than on
their societal effects. [Was this also true of our other
collaboratories, which also lacked or under-represented participants
representing individuals or groups who are affected by, rather than
composers of, Big Data?]

The genomics collaboratory brought into focus the various collective
efforts that are necessary to bring Big Data into being and into a state
in which it could potentially have impacts on the social.

As Hannah stated, collaboratories provide windows on the Big Data
problem space – the barriers and hurdles to data composition. These
insights are antidotes to the ballistic narratives of Big Data
autonomously spouting into being and self-propelling itself throughout
society.

Even though those ‘impacted’ upon were not direct participants in our
collaboratory, the collaboratory on waste in particular problematized
the ability of Big Data to have a predetermined effect or impact on
society. Whilst chips in bins had a positive effect on householders in
Sweden, there was no guarantee that this technology and the associated
Big Data would have the same impact in the UK. In other words, even
social impact is not an inherent property of Big Data that can be baked
into Big Data by careful composition; it too is relational.

Ethic of Care
=============

**Genomics already operates an ethic of care**

‘*A minor academic and professional industry has developed around the
ethical, social and legal implications of genomics as data-intensive
science. In Europe, UK, North America and several other countries,
government-funded research has extensively researched ethical issues
associated with genomics, mainly in the interests of protecting
patients, citizens and the public in general from either losing control
of their own data, or in the interests of helping various social groups
manage potential disadvantages or discrimination associated with genetic
data. … We would suggest that many framings of ethical issues associated
with genomic data have been narrowly individualistic, and they have paid
little attention to ethics already implicit to data practices’* (SBD WP
pp. 22-23 Genomics and Ethics).

The above translates into a framework for interrogating our existing
data on genomics from SBD and also into questions we could ask of future
studies / collaboratories on Big Data and genomics such as:

-   *how deeply are ethical concerns carried into data practice?*

-   *in what ways does an ethic of care already operate in data
    curation?*

-   *do not assume that ethics only relates to human research subjects
    or patients but also plays out in many different forms of
    relationships* (SBD WP pp. 22-23 Genomics and Ethics).

PROTEE, Collaboratories, Social Intelligence and an Ethic of Care
=================================================================

The PROTEE indicators provide a framework for relating what can be
learnt from collaboratories to enrich our social intelligence and
develop understanding of what constitutes an ethic of care.

Using this approach, Social Intelligence focuses on taking into account
the myriad entities that are implicated in the social life of Big Data,
whilst an Ethic of Care focuses on how relations between entities are,
and are not, being taken care of.

Realism, Strategy and Falsifiability are the names of the classes of
PROTEE indicators. Whilst related, each class provides a different
perspective and each draws out a different dimension of Social
Intelligence and an Ethic of Care.

**Realism –** as an antidote to the ballistic fallacy of data-driven
anything. Realism asks for attention to be paid throughout the entirety
of the social life of BD. It looks at the social life of BD throughout
its life course. In place of fragmented narratives of Big Data emerging
like water from a fire hose and then proceeding to have utopian or
dystopian socio-economic impacts, the objective here is to enrich
collective Social Intelligence and understanding regarding the
multiplicity of entities and their actions and interactions that are
involved in the composition of Big Data and its ability to have social
effects. It seeks a thick description – or rather – recognising the
impossibility of consensus - a multitude of descriptions.

Here, an ethic of care would be to highlight the myriad actions that
are, and can be, undertaken to care for the social relations of Big Data
– to make it fit and available for others to use. It highlights the
actions of curation that attend to the qualities of Big Data. Who
undertakes such actions of care? And who benefits from them? What is
made possible through them? What is impossible without them? And what
about the social effects of Big Data. They do not just happen by
themselves. How are they being taken care of, when and by whom?

**Strategy –** collaboratories also add to our Social Intelligence by
highlighting what entities are *outside of* the dominant narratives and
collectives – the stakeholders who are absent from the narratives (or
the collaboratories) because they choose to be (e.g. commercial
companies), or because they have been excluded. Yet although absent,
they may still be implicated. Some of them deeply. Collaboratories
enrich our Social Intelligence by attending to what kinds of entities
and relations Big Data is excluding – highlighting the antagonistic
relations and entities that cannot coexist with Big Data, or are being
driven into extinction by it – or which exist in a different data
economy.

Regarding an ethic of care, collaboratories are occasions to imagine the
collaboratory from the outside – to imagine what strategies might
involve the entities that are not participating? What could be done to
relate to them – to include them – to entice them to participate?

Such imaginings would highlight which kinds of Big Data actions tend to
be inclusive and which exclusive, and to which kinds of stakeholders.

It would cultivate recognition of what kinds of social relations Big
Data is replacing and consideration of their worth.

It would also invite consideration of how their participation could
alter the socio-economic dynamics of Big Data – for better or for worse.
What would be displaced by their inclusion? Should they – can they – be
involved at any cost? What are the opportunity costs of bringing them in
and leaving them out?

‘*As applications of sequencing have broadened, uses and techniques for
of analysing sequence data have expanded, but often in tension with
existing scientific expertise (for instance, plant breeding vs. genetic
modification; ecological field study vs sequence-based studies) (SBD WP
Genomics Economies p. 18). *

**Falsifiability –** Falsifiability is about not closing down
opportunities. It is about resisting homogenisation and taking
responsibility for the future. It is about daring to keep innovating and
resisting blindly falling into hegenomic ways of knowing and being. It
is about constantly seeking alternative ways to truth through Big Data
rather than relying on a few algorithms to dominate how we constitute
our future worlds.

*‘Needless to say, algorithms and techniques developed initially for
bioinformatics and genomic research have filtered out into other
data-intensive sciences’ (SBD WP Genomics Economies p. 18).*

*‘Need to ensure that a single form of data practice does not homogenise
or dominate domains to the exclusion of other ways of acting and
knowing’ (SBD WP Genomics Economies p. 18).*

From a Social Intelligence perspective, the collaboratories would be
occasions to interrogate how social meaning is being attributed to Big
Data? Are new ways being sought? Are old ways being challenged? Are the
social meanings of Big Data being challenged as time progresses, or is a
settlement being quietly reached without contestation?

From an Ethics of Care perspective, this class of indicator would
highlight the risks of not being vigilant, and the need for
responsibility – for the need for critical voices that are a constant
‘stone in the shoe’.

Social Intelligence and the Ethic of Care in the Collaboratory 
===============================================================

Social Intelligence
-------------------

The very composition of the participants in our collaboratory
highlighted how the composition of Big Data is generated by the
interactions of diverse actors (and technologies). We even applied an
ideal typology to categorise them into three groups with respect to
their roles in relation to NGS data:

A.  Gleaners and cleaners who create sequence data and make it fit for
    others to use (Sarah Ayling TGAC; Neil Hall, Advanced Genomics Univ
    of LiverpoolRe)

B.  Action heroes who use and apply NGS BD in novel ways (Lucy Raymond,
    100,000 Genome Project Rare Diseases; Gurdeep Sagee, Public Health
    Genomics; Will Spooner, Eagle Genomics)

C.  Packers, stackers and cataloguers who are concerned with the bulk
    handling and warehousing of NGS data and with making it available
    and discoverable for community use (Laura Clarke, Re-sequencing
    Informatics EBI; Rasko Leinonen, European Nucleotide Archive EBI;
    Chris Hayman, Amazon Web Services).

Large scale data collection projects, like the 1000 Genomes Project, are
inherently social, involving many laboratories, instrument vendors and
vendors of software and reagents, the quality control activities of
people like Laura at the EBI, and archiving activities of people like
Rasko at the EBI, and the data services of companies like Eagle Genomics
and Amazon Web Services. (Plus the people who provide the genomes and
those that interact with them in order to do so.)

Thus there was a general awareness at our collaboratory that NGS BD is
inherently social. There was also awareness – Social Intelligence - of
how the social composition of NGS BD has changed over time, with NGS
being in its middle phase.

### Social Intelligence in the archive

-   ‘ENA measures the growth of NGS data using multiple metrics’ (Rasko)

The metrics used in the ENA capture some of the social composition of
NGD BD. They are a form of Social Intelligence. We used this social
intelligence in our graphical provocations at the collaboratory.
Repository as informant.

### Social effects 

Our collaboratory did not have any representatives from the Social
Effects side.

Ethic of Care
-------------

### An Ethic of Care towards others involved in the Social Composition of BD

The Social Framework for BD states that ‘Acting with an ethic of care
entails taking responsibility for potential social effects’. At the
genomics collaboratory, Social Effects as envisaged in the top half of
the Social Framework diagram, only came into play in relation to the
activities of Action Heroes (Lucy on Rare Diseases in particular, and
Gurdeep on Public Health Genomics).

However, the myriad actions undertaken by the gleaners and cleaners and
the packers and stackers to take care of BD and ensure its quality of BD
can be seen as of taking responsibility for relations with other kinds
of actors involved in the Social Composition of BD, e.g:

-   TGAC developed KAT, the quality assessment tool to improve analysis
    of the quality of assemblies, and undertakes pilot sequencing to
    assess the nature of genomes before working with them;

-   EBI, Laura Clarke & Re-Sequencing Informatics – doing various checks
    (quantity, quality, identity and consistency) to ensure BD is of
    sufficient quality for the community to use.

Speaking about Identity and Consistency, Laura states ‘These require
more specialised methods that are created for, and then applied to, the
project in question’. This (and piloting by TGAC) would seem to
exemplify an Ethic of Care – ‘An ethic of care for BD is not applying
universal principles, but acting responsibly in light of particular
experiences and actual situations ….’ This was also illustrated by Rasko
speaking about the ENA:

-   The rate of growth must be monitored to assess future sustainability
    of current technologies, to assist in choice and adoption of new
    technologies, and to factor in the upper limit to identify and store
    data’ (Rasko)

This quote also illustrates the use of metrics when making ethical
decisions about BD (see below).(But was this just because we focused on
metrics in our collaboratory?)

### Amazon Web Services, Social Intelligence and an Ethic of Care? Or Business Intelligence and a Value Proposition?

Amazon has analysed the Social Composition of BD and identified a
business opportunity.

-   ‘The complexity of genomic research has introduced further
    challenges, such as data management and access to valuable data
    sets. Previously, large data sets (e.g. HGP) proved difficult to
    locate, download, customise and analyse. AWS has devised a solution
    to this problem, introducing new technologies … that provide
    scalable, cost-effective, flexible and secure storage services … to
    manage and analyse genomic data … in addition to hosting data …’

This seems to demonstrate Social Intelligence. (Eagle Genomics also uses
Social Intelligence to identify its niche in the Social Composition of
NGS BD). What is the difference between Business Intelligence and Social
Intelligence. AWS is taking care of certain aspects of BD – is this an
example of an Ethic of Care? The other participants at the collaboratory
don’t think so! This is in contrast to how they relate to the EBI’s
archiving and analysis services. How does an Ethic of Care differ from a
Value Proposition?

### A Variable Standard of Care – Demonstrates Social Intelligence; Illustrates Social Composition

NGS data are produced for a wide variety of uses, communities and
applications. The standard of care varies with imagined social effects.
This applies to the rigour of the results and analysis. It is highest
when the social effects are the clinic. This demonstrates Social
Intelligence – awareness of feedback between Social Composition and
Social Effects. Also different kinds of project exercise different
levels of care with regard to how NGS datasets are neatly packaged and
stored, and when and whether they are made publicly available with many
commercial NGS datasets being held in private. This illustrates the
effect of Social Composition on the Social Effects of NGS; public
repositories seek to maximise the potential for positive social effects.

### Problems with existing ethical approaches: Informed consent

This was expressed when discussing the ethical issues arising out of the
clinical implementation of NGS, including 100,000 Genomics Project,
specifically in relation to incidental findings. Gurdeep asked whether
informed consent is ever possible? There are significant barriers to
acquiring informed consent, particularly as it applies to logistics
around time and cost.

### Problems with existing ethical approaches: Loss of anonymity - and an Ethic of Care proposal for how to deal with it?

Gurdeep – anonymity can be lost through data linkage.

Group 2 in the Discussion called for a political discussion about the
risks and vulnerabilities around data integration, especially as this
applies to health. Is this an Ethic of Care?

### Problems with existing ethical approaches: Metrics and cost-benefit analyses 

Gurdeep spoke about how cost-benefit analysis is used in health care.
Cost-benefits uses metrics to compare the costs and consequences of two
alternative programmes in order to make a decision over which to use.
Cost-benefit analysis is an approach from utilitarian ethics.

But in the case of NGS, ‘many different metrics are needed’. Whilst
these can be developed, there is still a lack of consensus over which
method or analytical approach to use. ‘At present, NGS technology raises
more questions than answers’.

It suggests that it is not just more metrics that are needed, but that
NGS is challenging the limits of the applicability of existing universal
ethical approaches (utilitarianism) for public health care.

### Metrics and the Ethic of Care 

Because we framed our collaboratory around the topic of ‘metrics’,
metrics featured prominently in the presentations and discussions.

Nonetheless, there did seem to be an affinity between metrics and ethics
– or the way that NGS BD is looked after, curated and cared for so that
it is fit for use and available for use by others. If an Ethic of Care
is maximising the utility of BD, then metrics function as an ethical
tool for caring for BD.

However, there seems to be a distinction between how metrics are used in
utilitarianism (cost-benefit analyses) and how they feature in what
might be called an ethic of care. Whereas in cost-benefit analysis
metrics are used to weigh up the pros and cons of two alternative
courses of action, in an Ethic of Care they seem to be a proxy for
measuring quality – like an inherent property of BD.

### Veracity

A key challenge of working with genomics BD is establishing its
veracity, or truthfulness.

-   ‘One of the problems of working with BD is that there is no truth
    set and this gives rise to the issue of veracity’ (Will).

-   ‘Assessing the veracity of genomic data raises …. ethical concerns
    regarding how diagnostics developed from “omics” technologies should
    be regulated in the clinic (Will).

Ethic of Care in genomics. Is trying to deal with uncertainty at the
same time as accepting that there is no skyhook – no privileged position
from which to decide on the ‘true sequence of the DNA’ (Raymond, p. 18).

These are concerns that troubled Lucy. How to distinguish correlation
from causation? The decision calls for a ‘balancing judgement’ (Raymond
p. 19). But also for greater social participation in data composition
(Raymond p. 19).

### An Ethic of Care for the Clinic?

Lucy was the most focused on the Social Effects of NGS BD. Indeed, the
Social Effects are the objective of the 100,000 Genomes Project. As far
as possible, clinicians use metrics to help them to make decisions:

-   ‘At present, the key metrics that clinicians rely on daily vary from
    the quality assurance of gene analysis, gene variation, quantity,
    the cost of testing, and whether the variant has been reported
    before’ (Lucy).

But there are missing metrics.

-   ‘At present we cannot measure the cause of the disease. Just because
    a variant is detected in an individual with a disease, the
    correlation does not imply causation. When looking for the important
    variants associated with intellectual disability, for example, many
    factors can be a play (e.g. genetically highly heterogeneous,
    multiple possible causes. Processing this data into meaningful
    information consequently introduces a series of risks, which include
    balancing judgement of variant causation with the risk of harm if
    the data is incorrect or misinterpreted’ (Lucy)

In the absence of metrics, professional judgement is used to assess the
evidence, including assessing the reputation of other scientists. But
Lucy anticipates the production of new metrics to reduce uncertainty by
altering the Social Composition of the data – see below.

### Social Intelligence and an Ethic of Care

-   ‘To improve the quality of analysis we need a greater volume of
    genomic data pertaining to patients with rare diseases’ (Lucy)

This demonstrates Social Intelligence – the feedback between social
effect and social composition. For rare diseases there is a risk of
confusing correlation with causation with potentially harmful effects.
However, according to Lucy, this risk can be reduced by including more
patients with rare diseases in the social composition of BD. But is this
really the case? Or is it just self-serving? If it is the case, does
this apply to other domains of BD – i.e. including more suspect bodies
in the social composition reduces the risk of mistaken social effects?
Is this just the same as saying that if we profile everyone there won’t
be any risks of misclassification?

### Finally - Will Spooner on social composition at the final collaboratory

-   ‘Within the field of genomics, the focus is on establishing new
    definitions about BD and novel ways to express and classify BD that
    recognise its social context rather than merely focusing on its
    technical qualities’ (Spooner).

-   ‘For Will, this Final Collaboratory led to the growing realisation
    that BD is inherently social compared to other sorts of data. The
    value of BD is maximised by integrating multiple data sources to
    arrive at a multidimensional viewpoint of the problem at hand. BD is
    characterised as a data object that has relevance to multiple
    stakeholders beyond the use for which it was originally collected.’

Will took up the concept of a data object, and found ‘boundary object’
useful, and said he would have like more social science concepts from us
to help him.

[^1]: Barry, A., Born, G., Weszkalnys, G. (2008) Logic of
    interdisciplinarity *Economy and Society*, 37:1, 20-49
